SCIENCE
Subject Code – 086
Class X (2026-27)
Introduction
Science is the study of the natural and physical world around us through a systematic
process of observing, questioning, forming hypotheses, testing hypotheses through
experiment, analysing evidence, and continuously revising our knowledge. It develops
essential skills like curiosity, creativity, evidence-based thinking, and sound decision-making
that help us lead rational and fulfilling lives. Learning Science provides valid knowledge about
the world, and builds scientific values and capacities. It draws knowledge from Biology,
Chemistry, Physics, Earth Science, Mathematics, Computational Sciences, and sometimes
Social Science and Vocational Education to offer an interdisciplinary understanding of the
role of science.
Science Education helps students to develop an understanding of the natural and physical
world through systematic inquiry. Learning Science also develops important capacities, such
as observation, questioning, analysis, inference, etc. This helps individuals to meaningfully
participate in society and the world of work with a scientific temper, critical and evidencebased thinking, asking relevant questions, analysing practices and norms, and acting for
necessary change.
Science Education aims to achieve:
● Scientific understanding of the natural and physical world;
● Capacities for scientific inquiry;
● Understanding the evolution of scientific knowledge;
● Interdisciplinary understanding between Science and other curricular areas;
● Understanding of the relationship between Science, Technology, and Society;
● Scientific temper, and
● Creativity.
Together, the NEP 2020 and NCF-SE 2023 envision science classrooms that encourage
curiosity, creativity, collaboration and connection with the real world, ultimately nurturing not
just future scientists, but responsible, informed and critically thinking citizens.
Learning standards (Curricular Goals and Competencies) describe what students should
know, understand, and be able to do in Science. In Grades 9 – 10, Science is taught using an
integrated approach that combines Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Earth Science. This
helps students understand the connections between disciplines and relate Science to their
observations and experiences. At this stage, scientific inquiry skills are developed alongside
conceptual understanding, with content selected both for disciplinary relevance and real-life
usefulness. Students must deepen their understanding of the world, explore scientific
questions through discussion and experimentation, and communicate their learning in
various ways. It is important to note that the Curricular Goals are interdependent and not
separate.
Learning standards are organised into four levels: broad curricular aims define the overall
objectives for Science Learning by the end of each schooling stage; more specific Curricular
Goals guide the design of the science curriculum for each stage and topic; Competencies
represent measurable scientific skills and knowledge-based on these goals, assessed at the
end of each stage; and detailed Learning Outcomes (LOs) are granular milestones of
learning and usually progress in a sequence leading to the attainment of a competency.
These LOs enable teachers to plan their content, pedagogy, and assessments towards
achieving specific competencies.
Curricular Goals (CGs) and Competencies (Cs)
CG 1 – Explores the world of matter, its interactions, and properties at the atomic level
C 1.1 – Describes classification of elements in the Periodic Table, and explains how
compounds (including carbon compounds) are formed based on the atomic structure (Bohr’s
model) and properties (valency).
C 1.2 – Investigates the nature and properties of chemical substances (distillation,
crystallisation, chromatography, centrifugation, types and properties of mixtures, solutions,
colloids, and suspensions)
C 1.3 – Describes and represents chemical interactions and changes using symbols and
chemical equations (acid and base, metal and non-metal, reversible and irreversible)
CG 2 – Explores the physical world around them, and understands scientific principles
and laws based on observations and analysis
C 2.1 – Applies Newton’s laws to explain the effect of forces (change in state of motion —
 displacement and direction, velocity and acceleration, uniform circular motion, acceleration
due to gravity) and analyses graphical and mathematical representations of motion in one
dimension
C 2.2 – Explains the relationship between mass and weight using universal law of gravitation,
and connect it to the laws of motion
C 2.3 – Manipulates the position of object and properties of lenses (focus, centre of
curvature) to observe image characteristics and correspondence with a ray diagram, and
extends this understanding to a combination of lenses (telescope, microscope)
C 2.4 – Manipulates and analyses different characteristics of the circuit (current, voltage,
resistance) and mathematises their relationship (Ohm’s law), and applies it to everyday
usage (electricity bill, short circuit, safety measures)
C 2.5 – Defines work in scientific terms, and represents the relationship between potential
and kinetic energy (conservation of energy) in mathematical expressions
C 2.6 – Demonstrates the principle of mechanical advantage by constructing simple
machines (system of levers and pulleys)
C 2.7 – Describes the origin and properties of sound (wavelength, frequency, amplitude) and
differences in what we hear as it propagates through different instruments
C 2.8 – *Explores interconnected systems and phenomena that support and affect life on
Earth (hydrosphere, biosphere, atmosphere, geosphere, cryosphere and their
interrelationships, earth processes, hazards, etc.)
*Additional Competency for Earth Science
CG 3 – Explores the structure and function of the living world at the cellular level
C 3.1 – Explains the role of cellular components (nucleus, mitochondria, endoplasmic
reticulum, vacuoles, chloroplast, cell wall), including the semi-permeability of cell membrane
in making cell the structural basis of living organisms and functional basis of life processes
C 3.2 – Analyses similarities and differences in the life processes involved in nutrition
(photosynthesis in plants; absorption of nutrients in fungi; digestion in animals), transport
(transport of water in plants; circulation in animals), exchange of materials (respiration and
excretion), and reproduction
C 3.3 – Describes the mechanisms of heredity (in terms of DNA, genes, chromosomes) and
variation (as changes in the sequence of DNA)
CG 4 – Explores interconnectedness between organisms and their environment
C 4.1 – Applies the knowledge of cellular diversity in organisms along with the ecological role
organisms play (autotrophic or heterotrophic nutrition) to classify them into five kingdoms
C 4.2 – Illustrates different levels of organisations of living organisms (from molecules to
organisms)
C 4.3 – Analyses different levels of biological organisation from organisms to ecosystems
and biomes along with interactions that take place at each level
C 4.4 – Analyses patterns of inheritance of traits in terms of Mendel’s laws and its
consequences at a population level (using models and/or simulations)
C 4.5 – Analyses evidences of biological evolution demonstrating the consequences of the
process of natural selection in terms of changes — in allele frequency in population,
structure, and function of organisms
CG 5 – Draws linkages between scientific knowledge and knowledge across other
curricular areas
C 5.1 – Explores how literature and arts have influenced Science
C 5.2 – Examines a case study related to the use of Science in human life from the
perspective of Social Sciences and Ethics (for example, Marie Curie, Jenner, treatment of
patients with mental illnesses, the story of the atomic bomb, green revolution and GMOs,
conservation of biodiversity)
C 5.3 – Applies scientific principles to explain phenomena in other subjects (sound pitch,
octave, and amplitude in music; use of muscles in dance form and sports)
CG 6 – Understands and appreciates the contribution of India through history, and the
present time to the overall field of Science, including the disciplines that constitute it
C 6.1 – Knows and explains the significant contributions of India to all matters (concepts,
explanations, methods) that are studied within the curriculum in an integrated manner
CG 7 – Develops awareness of the most current discoveries, ideas, and frontiers in all
areas of scientific knowledge in order to appreciate that Science is ever evolving, and
that there are still many unanswered questions
C 7.1 – States concepts that represent the most current understanding of the matter being
studied, ranging from mere familiarity to conceptual understanding of the matter as
appropriate to the developmental stage of the students
C 7.2 – States questions related to matters in the curriculum for which current scientific
understanding is well-recognised
CG 8 – Explores the nature of Science by doing Science
C 8.1 – Develops accurate and appropriate models (including geometric, mathematical,
graphical) to represent real-life events and phenomena using scientific principles, and use
these models to manipulate variables and predict results
C 8.2 – Designs and implements a plan for scientific inquiry (formulates hypotheses, makes
predictions, identifies variables, accurately uses scientific instruments, represents data —
primary and secondary — in multiple modes, draws inferences based on data, and
understanding of scientific concepts, theories, laws and principles, and communicates
findings using scientific terminology)
COURSE STRUCTURE
CLASS X (2026-27)
(Annual Examination)
Time: 03 Hours Marks: 80
Unit No. Unit Marks
I Chemical Substances-Nature and Behaviour 25
II World of Living 25
III Natural Phenomena 12
IV Effects of Current 13
V Natural Resources 05
Total 80
Internal assessment 20
Grand Total 100
Theme: Materials
Unit I: Chemical Substances - Nature and Behaviour
Chemical Reactions and Equations: Chemical reactions, Chemical equation, Balanced
chemical equation, types of chemical reactions: combination, decomposition, displacement,
double displacement, precipitation, endothermic exothermic reactions, oxidation and
reduction.
The following topics are included in the syllabus but will be assessed only formatively to
reinforce understanding without adding to summative assessments. The reduces academic
stress while ensuring meaningful learning. Schools can integrate these with existing
chapters as they align well. Relevant NCERT textual material is enclosed for reference.
Periodic Classification of Elements: Döbereiner’s Triads, Newlands’ Law of Octaves,
Mendeléev’s Periodic Table, Modern Periodic Table and the Modern, Metallic and Nonmetallic Properties.
Acids, Bases and Salts: Acids and Bases – definitions in terms of furnishing of H+
and
OH–
ions, identification using indicators, chemical properties, examples and uses,
neutralization, concept of pH scale (Definition relating to logarithm not required), importance
of pH in everyday life; preparation and uses of Sodium Hydroxide, Bleaching Powder,
Baking soda,Washing soda and Plaster of Paris.
Metals and Non-metals: Properties of metals and non-metals; Reactivity series; Formation
and properties of ionic compounds; Basic metallurgical processes; Corrosion and its
prevention.
Carbon and its Compounds: Covalent bonds – formation and properties of covalent
compounds, Versatile nature of carbon, Hydrocarbons – saturated and unsaturated
Homologous series. Nomenclature of alkanes, alkenes, alkyne and carbon compounds
containing functional groups (halogens, alcohol, ketones, aldehydes). Chemical properties
of carbon compounds (combustion, oxidation, addition and substitution reaction). Ethanol
and Ethanoic acid (only properties and uses), soaps and detergents.
Theme: The World of the Living
Unit II: World of Living
Life processes: ‘Living Being’. Basic concept of nutrition, respiration, transport and excretion
in plantsand animals.
Control and co-ordination in animals and plants: Tropic movements in plants;
Introduction of plant hormones; Control and co-ordination in animals: Nervous system;
Voluntary, involuntary and reflex action; Chemical co-ordination: animal hormones.
Reproduction: Reproduction in animals and plants (asexual and sexual) reproductive
health - need and methods of family planning. Safe sex vs HIV/AIDS. Child bearing and
women’s health.
Heredity: Heredity; Mendel’s contribution- Laws for inheritance of traits: Sex determination;
brief introduction.
The following topics are included in the syllabus but will be assessed only formatively to
reinforce understanding without adding to summative assessments. The reduces
academic stress while ensuring meaningful learning. Schools can integrate these with
existing chapters as they align well. Relevant NCERT textual material is enclosed for
reference.
Evolution: Acquired and Inherited Traits, Speciation, Evolution and Classification, Tracing
Evolutionary Relationships, Fossils, Evolution by Stages, Human Evolution
Theme: Natural Phenomena
Unit III: Natural Phenomena
Reflection of light by curved surfaces; Images formed by spherical mirrors, centre of
curvature, principal axis, principal focus, focal length, mirror formula (Derivation not
required), magnification.
Refraction; Laws of refraction, refractive index.
Refraction of light by spherical lens; Image formed by spherical lenses; Lens formula
(Derivationnot required); Magnification. Power of a lens.
Functioning of a lens in human eye, defects of vision and their corrections, applications of
spherical mirrors and lenses.
Refraction of light through a prism, dispersion of light, scattering of light, applications in
daily life (excluding colour of the sun at sunrise and sunset).
Theme: How Things Work
 Unit IV: Effects of Current
Electric current, potential difference and electric current. Ohm’s law; Resistance, Resistivity,
Factors on which the resistance of a conductor depends. Series combination of resistors,
parallel combination of resistors and its applications in daily life. Heating effect of electric
current and its applications in daily life. Electric power, Interrelation between P, V, I and R.
Magnetic effects of current: Magnetic field, field lines, field due to a current carrying
conductor, field due to current carrying coil or solenoid; Force on current carrying
conductor, Fleming’s Left Hand Rule, Direct current. Alternating current: frequency of AC.
Advantage of AC over DC. Domestic electric circuits.
The following topics are included in the syllabus but will be assessed only formatively to
reinforce understanding without adding to summative assessments. The reduces
academic stress while ensuring meaningful learning. Schools can integrate these with
existing chapters as they align well. Relevant NCERT textual material is enclosed for
reference
Motor, Electromagnetic Induction, Electric Generator
Theme: Natural Resources
Unit V: Natural Resources
Our environment: Eco-system, Environmental problems, Ozone depletion, waste
production and their solutions. Biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances.
Note for Teachers:
1. The topics Periodic Classification of Elements; Heredity and Evolution; and Electric
Effects of Electric Current will not be assessed in the year-end examination.
2. Learners may be assigned to read these topics/chapter and encouraged to
prepare a brief write up in their Portfolio. Teachers should provide joyful and
experiential opportunities. This may be for Internal Assessment and credit may be
given for Periodic Assessment/Portfolio.
3. The NCERT text books present information in boxes across the book. These help
students to get conceptual clarity. However, the information in these boxes would
not be assessed in the year-end examination.
PRACTICALS
Practical should be conducted alongside the concepts taught in theory classes.
LIST OF EXPERIMENTS
1. A. Finding the pH of the following samples by using pH paper/universal indicator: Unit-I
a) Dilute Hydrochloric Acid
b) Dilute NaOH solution
c) Dilute Ethanoic Acid solution
d) Lemon juice
e) Water
f) Dilute Hydrogen Carbonate solution
B. Studying the properties of acids and bases (HCl & NaOH) on the basis of their
reaction with: Unit-I
a) Litmus solution (Blue/Red)
b) Zinc metal
c) Solid sodium carbonate
2. Performing and observing the following reactions and classifying them into: Unit-I
a) Combination reaction
b) Decomposition reaction
c) Displacement reaction
d) Double displacement reaction
 Action of water on quicklime
 Action of heat on ferrous sulphate crystals
 Iron nails kept in copper sulphate solution
 Reaction between sodium sulphate and barium chloride solutions
3. Observing the action of Zn, Fe, Cu and Al metals on the following salt solutions:
Unit-I
a) ZnSO4 (aq)
b) FeSO4 (aq)
c) CuSO4 (aq)
d) Al2
(SO4
)3
(aq)
Arranging Zn, Fe, Cu and Al (metals) in the decreasing order of reactivity based
on theabove result.
4. Studying the dependence of potential difference (V) across a resistor on the current (I)
passing through it and determine its resistance. Also plotting a graph between V and I.
Unit-IV
5. Determination of the equivalent resistance of two resistors when connected in
series and parallel. Unit-IV
6. Preparing a temporary mount of a leaf peel to show stomata. Unit- II
7. Experimentally show that carbon dioxide is given out during respiration. Unit-II
8. Study of the following properties of acetic acid (ethanoic acid): Unit- I
a) Odour
b) solubility in water
c) effect on litmus
d) reaction with Sodium Hydrogen Carbonate
9. Study of the comparative cleaning capacity of a sample of soap in soft and hard water.
Unit- I
10. Determination of the focal length of: Unit-III
a) Concave mirror
b) Convex lens by obtaining the image of a distant object.
11. Tracing the path of a ray of light passing through a rectangular glass slab for different
angles of incidence. Measure the angle of incidence, angle of refraction, angle of
emergence andinterpret the result. Unit - III
12. Studying (a) binary fission in Amoeba, and (b) budding in yeast and Hydra with the
help of prepared slides. Unit-II
13. Tracing the path of the rays of light through a glass prism. Unit-III
14. Identification of the different parts of an embryo of a dicot seed (pea, gram or red
kidney bean).
 Unit-II
PRESCRIBED BOOKS:
 Science-Text book for class X- NCERT Publication
 Assessment of Practical Skills in Science- Class X- CBSE Publication
 Laboratory Manual-Science-Class X, NCERT Publication
 Exemplar Problems Class X – NCERT Publication
 Reading Material – Science – Class X (2026-27) – CBSE
Question Paper Design (Theory)
Class X (2026-27)
Science (086)
Theory (80 marks)
Competencies Total
Demonstrate Knowledge and Understanding 50 %
Application of Knowledge/Concepts 30 %
Formulate, Analyze, Evaluate and Create 20 %
Note:
 Typology of Questions: VSA including objective type questions, Assertion –
Reasoning type questions; SA; LA; Source-based/ Case-based/ Passage-based/
Integrated assessment questions.
 An internal choice of approximately 33% would be provided.
Internal Assessment (20 Marks)
 Periodic Assessment - 05 marks
 Multiple Assessment - 05 marks
 Portfolio - 05 marks
 Subject Enrichment (Practical Work) - 05 marks
Suggestive verbs for various competencies
 Demonstrate Knowledge and Understanding
State, name, list, identify, define, suggest, describe, outline, summarize, etc.
 Application of Knowledge/Concepts
Calculate, illustrate, show, adapt, explain, distinguish, etc.
 Formulate, Analyze, Evaluate and Create
Interpret, analyze, compare, contrast, examine, evaluate, discuss, construct, etc.