1
Social Science
Subject Code-087
Class - X (2026-27)
COURSE STRUCTURE
History (India and the Contemporary World-II)
20 Marks
inclusive of
map pointing
Section Chapter
No.
Chapter name Marks
I
Events and
processes
I The Rise of Nationalism in Europe
18+2 map
pointing
II Nationalism in India
II
Livelihoods,
Economies and
Societies
III The Making of a Global World
(To be evaluated in the Board Examination
Subtopics: 1 to 1.3 Pre Modern World to
Conquest, disease and trade)
Interdisciplinary project as part of multiple
assessments
(Internally assessed for 5 marks) Subtopics
2 to 4.4 –The nineteenth century (1815-1914)
to end of Bretton Woods & the beginning of
“Globalisation”
IV The Age of Industrialisation
(Tobe assessed as part of Periodic
Assessment only)
III.
Everyday Life,
Culture and politics
V Print Culture and the Modern world
Geography (Contemporary India-II)
Marks-20
inclusive
map pointing
Chapter No. Chapter Name Marks
1 Resources and Development
17+3 map
pointing
2 Forest and Wildlife Resources
3 Water resources
4 Agriculture
5 Minerals and energy Resources
6 Manufacturing Industries
7 Lifelines of National Economy
(Only map pointing to be evaluated in the Board
Examination)
2
Interdisciplinary project as part of multiple assessments
(Internally assessed for 5 marks)
Political Science (Democratic Politics-II) 20
Unit No. Chapter No. Chapter name Marks
I 1 Power-sharing
Federalism
20
2
II 3 Gender, Religion and Caste
III 4 Political Parties
IV 5 Outcomes of Democracy
Economics (Understanding Economic Development) 20
Chapter No. Chapter name Marks
1 Development
20
2 Sectors of the Indian Economy
3 Money and Credit
4  Globalisation and the Indian Economy to be evaluated in
the Board Examination
 What is Globalisation?
 Factors that have enabled Globalisation
 Interdisciplinary project as part of multiple assessment
(Internally assessed for 5 marks)
 Production across the countries
 Chinese toys in India
 World Trade Organisation
 The Struggle for a Fair Globalisation
5 Consumer Rights (Project Work)
CLASS X (2026-27)
COURSE CONTENT
HISTORY: India and the ContemporaryWorld - II
Chapter I -The Rise of Nationalism in Europe
Learning outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Infer how French Revolution had an impact on the European countries in the making of a
nation state.
⮚ Comprehend the nature of the diverse social movements of the time.
⮚ Analyse and infer the evolution of the idea of nationalism which led to the formation of nation
states in Europe and elsewhere.
⮚ Evaluate the reasons which led to the First World War.
3
Chapter 2 Nationalism in India
Learning outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Illustrate various facets of Nationalistic movements that ushered in the sense of Collective
Belonging.
⮚ Evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies applied by Gandhiji and other leaders in the
movements organised by him.
⮚ Summarise the effects of the First World War that triggered the two defining movements
(Khilafat &Non- Cooperation Movement) in India
Chapter 3-. The Making of a Global World
Subtopic 1. The pre-modern world
Subtopic 2. 19th century 1815 -1914
Subtopic 3. The inter- war economy
Subtopic 4. Rebuilding of world economy: the post war era.
Inter disciplinary Project with chapter 7 of Geography: Lifelines of National Economy and
chapter 4 of Economics: Globalisation and the Indian Economy
Refer Annexure III B
Learning outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Summarise the changes that transformed the world in different areas.
⮚ Depict the global interconnectedness from the Pre-modern to the present day.
⮚ Enumerate the destructive impact of colonialism on the livelihoods of colonised people.
Chapter 4-The Age of Industrialisation
Learning outcome- The students will be able to
 Enumerate economic, political, social features of Pre and Post Industrialization.
 Analyse and infer how the industrialization impacted colonies with specific focus on India
Chapter 5. Print culture and the Modern World
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate the development of Print from its beginnings in East Asia to its expansion in
Europe and India.
⮚ Compare and contrast the old tradition of handwritten manuscripts versus print technology.
⮚ Summarise the role of Print revolution and its impact
4
Geography: Contemporary India – II
Chapter 1- Resources and Development
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
 Enumerates how the resources are interdependent, justify how planning is essential in
judicious utilisation of resources and the need to develop them in India.
⮚ Infer the rationale for development of resources.
⮚ Analyse and evaluate data and information related to non-optimal land, utilization in India
⮚ Suggest remedial measures for optimal utilization of underutilized resources
Chapter 2- Forest and Wildlife Resources
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Examine the importance of conserving forests and wildlife and their interdependency in
maintaining the ecology for the sustainable development of India.
⮚ Analyse the role of grazing and wood cutting in the development and degradation
⮚ Summarise the reasons for conservation of biodiversity under sustainable development.
⮚ Discuss how developmental works, grazing wood cutting have impacted the forests
⮚ Use art integration to summarise and present the reasons for conservation of biodiversity in
India under sustainable development.
Chapter 3-Water Resources
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Examine the reasons for conservation of water resource in India.
⮚ Analyse and infer how the multipurpose projects are supporting the requirement of water.
Chapter 4- Agriculture
Learning Outcome
⮚ Examine the crucial role played by agriculture in our economy and society.
⮚ Analyse the challenges faced by the farming community in India.
⮚ Identifies various aspects of agriculture, including crop production, types of farming etc.
Chapter 5- Minerals and Energy Resources
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate the impact of manufacturing industries on the environment and develop strategies
for sustainable development of the manufacturing sector.
⮚ Differentiate between various types of manufacturing industries based on their input materials,
processes, and end products, and analyse their significance in the Indian economy.
⮚ Analyse the relation between the availability of raw material and location of the industry
Chapter 6- Manufacturing Industries
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
 Enumerates the impact of manufacturing industries on the environment and develop strategies
for sustainable development of the sector.
 Differentiates between various types of manufacturing industries based on their input materials,
processes, and end products, and analyse their significance in the Indian economy.
5
 Analyses the relation between the availability of raw material and location of the industry
Chapter 7- Life Lines of National Economy
Interdisciplinary project with chapter 3 of History: The making of a Global world and chapter 4 of
Economics: Globalisation and the Indian Economy
Learning Outcome-Refer Annexure III-B
Political Science: Democratic Politics - II
Chapter 1- Power – sharing
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate the need for power sharing in democracy.
⮚ Analyse the challenges faced by countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka ensuring effective
power sharing.
⮚ Compare and contrast the power sharing of India with Sri Lanka and Belgium.
⮚ Summarise the purpose of power sharing in preserving the unity and stability of a country
Chapter 2-Federalism
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Infer how federalism is being practised in India.
⮚ Analyse the policies and politics that has strengthened federalism in practice.
Chapter 3- Gender, Religion and Caste
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Examine the role and differences of Gender, religion and Caste in practicing Democracy.
⮚ Analyse that different expressions based on the differences, are healthy or otherwise in a
democracy
Chapter 4- Political Parties
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Understand the process of parties getting elected.
⮚ Know the significance of the right to vote and exercise the duties as citizens of a nation.
⮚ Examine the role, purpose and no. of Political Parties in Democracy.
Chapter 5- Outcomes of Democracy
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerates how the success of democracy depends on quality of government, economic
well- being, inequality, social differences, conflict, freedom and dignity.
6
Economics: Understanding Economic Development
Chapter- 1. Development
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate and examine the different processes involved in setting developmental Goals.
⮚ Analyse and infer how the per capita income depicts the economic condition of the nation.
⮚ Evaluate the development goals with reference to their efficacy, implemental strategies,
relevance to current requirements of the nation.
⮚ Compare the per capita income of some countries and infer reasons for the variance.
⮚ Analyse the multiple perspectives on the need of development.
Chapter 2- Sectors of the Indian Economy
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Analyse and infer how the economic activities in different sectors contribute to the overall
growth and development of the Indian economy.
⮚ Propose solutions to identified problems in different sectors based on their understanding.
⮚ Summarise how the organised and unorganised sectors are providing employment
⮚ Enumerate the role of the unorganised sector in impacting Per Capita Income currently and
propose suggestive steps to reduce the unorganised sector for more productive
contributions to GDP.
⮚ Enumerate and infer the essential role of the Public and Private sectors
Chapter 3- Money and Credit
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate how money plays as a medium exchange in all transactions of goods and
services from ancient times to the present times.
⮚ Analyse and infer various sources of Credit.
⮚ Summarise the significance and role of self-help groups in the betterment of the economic
condition of rural people/ women.
Chapter- 4. Globalisation and the Indian Economy
Subtopics: What is Globalisation?
Factors that have enabled Globalisation.
Interdisciplinary Project with chapter 3 of History: “The Making of a Global World” and chapter
7 of Geography: “Lifelines of National Economy”
Subtopics:
i. Production across the countries
ii. World Trade Organisation
iii. The Struggle for a Fair Globalisation
Refer Annexure III-B
7
Learning Outcome- The students will be able to
⮚ Enumerate the concept of globalisation and its definition, evolution, and impact on the global
economy.
⮚ Evaluate the key role of the key major drivers of globalisation and their role in shaping the
global economic landscape in various countries.
⮚ Comprehend the significance of role of G20 and its significance in the light of India's role.
5. Project work - Consumer Rights OR Social Issues OR Sustainable Development
Learning Outcome- Refer Annexure III
CLASS X (2025-26)
MAP WORK
Subject Name of the Chapter List of areas to be located/ labeled/ identified on the
map
History Nationalism in India I. Congress sessions:
 1920 Calcutta
 1920 Nagpur
 1927 Madras session
II. 3 Satyagraha movements:
 Kheda
 Champaran
 Ahmedabad mill workers
III. Jallianwala Bagh
IV. Dandi March
Geography Resources and
Development
Identify Major Soil Types
Water Resources Locating and Labeling:
 Salal Sardar Sarovar
 Bhakra Nangal Hirakund
 Tehri Nagarjun Sagar
 Rana Pratap Sagar Tungabhadra
Agriculture Identify:
 Major areas of Rice and Wheat
 Largest/Major producer states of Sugarcane, Tea,
Coffee,
 Rubber, Cotton and Jute
Minerals and
Energy Resources
Identify:
Iron Ore Mines
Mayurbhanj
Durg
Bailadila
Bellary
Kudremukh
Coal Mines
Raniganj
Bokaro
Talcher
Neyveli
Oil Fields
Digboi Naharkatia
Mumbai High
Bassien
Kalol
Ankaleshwar
8
Locate and label: Power Plants
Manufacturing
Industries
 Manufacturing Industries (Locating and labeling only)
 Cotton textile Industries: a. Mumbai, b. Indore,
c. Surat, d. Kanpur, e. Coimbatore
 Iron and Steel Plants: a. Durgapur, b. Bokaro, c.
Jamshedpur, d. Bhilai, e. Vijayanagar, f. Salem
 Software technology Parks: a. Noida, b. Gandhi- nagar,
c. Mumbai, d. Pune, e. Hyderabad,
f. Bengaluru, g. Chennai,h. Thiruvananthapuram
Lifelines of National
Economy
Locating and Labeling
a. Major Sea Ports
• Kandla • Tuticorin
• Mumbai • Chennai
• Marmagao • Visakhapatnam
• New Mangalore • Paradip
• Kochi • Haldia
b. International Airports
 Amritsar (Raja Sansi-Sri Guru Ram Das ji)
 Delhi (Indira Gandhi)
 Mumbai (Chhatrapati Shivaji)
 Chennai (Meenambakkam)
 Kolkata (Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose)
 Hyderabad (Rajiv Gandhi)
Note
1. Items of Locating and Labelling may also be given for Identification.
2. The Maps available in the website of Govt. of India may be used.
Thermal Nuclear
 Namrup
 Singrauli
 Ramagundam
 Narora
 Kakrapara
 Tarapur
 Kalpakkam
9
CLASS X
QUESTION PAPER DESIGN
Subject Wise Weightage
Subject Syllabus Marks
(80)
Percentage
History  The Rise of Nationalism in Europe.
 Nationalism in India:
 The Making of a GlobalWorld Sub topics 1 to 1.3
 Print Culture and the Modern World
 Map pointing
18+2 25%
Political
Science
 Power – sharing
 Federalism
 Gender, Religion and Caste
 Political Parties
 Outcomes of Democracy
20 25%
Geography  Resources and Development
 Forest andWildlife Resources
 Water Resources
 Agriculture
 Mineral& Energy resources
 Manufacturing industries.
 Lifelines of National Economy (map pointing)
 Map pointing
17+3 25%
Economics  Development
 Sectors of the Indian Economy
 Money and Credit
 Globalisation and The Indian Economy
Sub topics:
 What is Globalisation?
 Factors that have enabled Globalisation
20 25%
10
Weightage to Type of Questions
Type of Questions Marks
(80)
Percent
age
1 Mark- MCQs (20x1)
(Inclusive Of Assertion, Reason, Differentiation & Stem)
20 25%
2 Marks- Long Answer Questions (4x2)
(Knowledge, Understanding, Application, Analysis,
Evaluation, Synthesis & Create)
8
10%
3 Marks- Long Answer Questions (5x3)
(Knowledge, Understanding, Application, Analysis,
Evaluation, Synthesis & Create)
15 18.75%
4 Marks- Case Study Questions (3x4) (Knowledge,
Understanding, Application, Analysis, Evaluation, Synthesis
& Create)
12
15%
5 Mark- Long Answer Questions (4x5)
(Knowledge, Understanding, Application, Analysis,
Evaluation, Synthesis & Create)
20 25%
Map Pointing 5 6.25%
Weightage to Competency Levels
Sr. No. Competencies Marks
(80)
Percentage
1 Remembering and Understanding: Exhibiting memory of
previously learned material by recalling facts, terms, basic
concepts, and answers; Demonstrating understanding of
facts and ideas by organizing, translating, interpreting,
giving descriptions and stating main ideas.
24 30%
2 Applying: Solving problems to new situations by applying
acquired knowledge, facts, techniques
and rules in a different way.
11 13.25%
3 Analysing, Evaluating and Creating:
Examining and breaking information into parts by
identifying motives or causes; Making inferences and
finding evidence to support generalizations; Presenting
and defending opinions by making judgments about
information, validity of ideas, or quality of work based on a
set of criteria.
Compiling information together in a different way by
combining elements in a new pattern or
proposing alternative solutions.
40 50%
4 Map Skill 5 6.25%
Total 80 100%
11
CLASS X (2026-27)
GUIDELINES FOR INTERNAL ASSESSMENT: 20 MARKS
Type of Assessment Description Marks
Periodic Assessment Pen Paper Test. 5
Multiple Assessment Quiz, debate, role play, viva, group discussion, visual
expression, interactive bulletin boards, gallery walks,
exit cards, concept maps, peer assessment, Selfassessment etc. through Interdisciplinary project
5
Subject Enrichment
Activity
ProjectWork on Consumer Rights OR Social Issues OR
Sustainable Development (Interdisciplinary)
5
Portfolio Classwork, Work done (activities/ assignments)
reflections, narrations, journals, etc. Achievements of
the student in the subject throughout the year
Participation of the student in different activities like
heritage India quiz
5
CLASS X
PRESCRIBED TEXTBOOKS
S.No. Subject Name of the Book Publisher
1 History India and the Contemporary World-II NCERT
2 Political Science Democratic Politics-II NCERT
3 Geography Contemporary India-II NCERT
4 Economics Understanding Economic Development NCERT
5 Disaster Management Together, towards a safer India- Part III CBSE
12
Interdisciplinary Project: Class X
Subject and
Chapter No.
Name of
the
Chapter
Suggested Teaching
Learning Process
Learning Outcomes
with Specific
Competencies
Time Schedule
For
Completion
History
Chapter III
Geography
Chapter 7
Making of a
Global World
Lifelines of
National
Economy
The teachers may use
the following
pedagogies in
facilitating the
students in completion
of Interdisciplinary
Project.
1) Constructivism
2) Inquiry based
learning
3) Cooperative
learning
4) Learning station
5) Collaborative
learning
6) Videos/ Visuals/
documentaries/ movie
clippings
7) Carousel technique
8) Art integrated
learning Group
Discussions Multiple
Assessment: Ex.
Surveys/ Interviews/
Research work/
Observation/ Story
based
⮚ Analyse the
implication of
globalisation for local
economies.
⮚ Discuss how
globalisation is
experienced
differently by
different social
groups. Enumerates
how transportation
works as a lifeline of
the economy.
⮚ Analyse and infer
the impact of
roadways and
railways on the
national economy.
⮚ Analyses and infers
the challenges faced
by the roadways and
railway sector in
India
The schools
do IDP
between the
months of
April and
September at
the School
under the
guidance of a
teacher.
(Carryover of
project to
home must
be strictly
avoided)
Economics
Chapter 4
Globalisation
on and the
Indian
Economy
Presentation/ Art
integration/ Quiz/
Debate/ role play/
viva, /group
discussion, /visual
expression/
interactive bulletin
boards/ gallery walks/
exit cards/ concept
maps/ peer
assessment/ art
integration /Self -
assessment/integrati
on of technology etc.
⮚ Integrate various
dimensions of
globalisation in
terms of cultural /
political/ social
/economic
aspects)
⮚ Appraise the
evolution of
Globalisation and
the global trends
⮚ Investigate the
factors that
facilitated the
growth on MNC ‘s
Guidelines:
 It involves combining 2 or more disciplines into one activity-more coherent and integrated.
The generally recognized disciplines are economics, History, Geography, Political Science,
a sample plan has been enclosed) Kindly access the link given below
13
 Methodology (A sample interdisciplinary project plan Link has been provided to get an insight
about IDP.
 Topic: The Making of a Global World, Globalisation and Lifelines of Economy
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dIwwFeaSrExJHMtkzcEuoq3ehh-7FtHM/edit
Plan of the project:
A suggestive 10 days’ plan given below which you may follow, or you can create on your own,
based on the templates provided below
Process:
Initial collaboration among students to arrange their roles, areas of integration, area of
investigation and analysis, roles of students
Class X: 10-day Suggestive plan for
Interdisciplinary Project
Day 1: Introduction to the Interdisciplinary Project and Setting the Context:
Brief overview of the project and its objectives to be given by the teachers.
History teacher to Introduce the historical context of World War II and its aftermath through
inquiry methods.
Make the students to Group discuss the impact of World War II on the global economy.
Teacher to refer annexure III for rubrics)
Day 2: The Great Depression:
Students to watch a video from the link, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62DxELjuRec and
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqx2E5qIV9s and discuss the causes and consequences of
the Great Depression and the role of mass production and consumption in the Great
Depression. Present a group PPT /report on consequences of the Great Depression on the
global economy.
Day 3: India and the Great Depression:
Students to collect material related to India’s economic condition during the Great Depression
and relate it to the present economic condition of India and US. Students may collect
information through a visit to the library.
As a group activity they need to present a collage of their findings. (Refer Annexure V for
Rubrics)
Day 4: Rebuilding the World Economy and Interlinking Production across countries
 Teachers to use Jigsaw method to make the students to sit in groups and to give each group a
part of the handout with information about process taken to rebuild economy and how the
production across countries got interlinked. Make the groups to compile the information by
moving from group to group.
 Make them discuss the post-war recovery efforts and their impact on the global economy
 Study the role of the Bretton Woods Institutions in rebuilding the world economy and present
their learnings through Art Integrated Project. Refer Annexure V for rubrics.
14
Day 5: The EarlyPost-War Years: The role of roadways, railways, waterways and airways
in building the national economy
 The teacher distributes the Handout 1 given below to the groups and asks them to find
answers to the questions posed at the end of Hand out and present it in groups using Café
conversations mode. Refer Annexure III for rubrics.
 Study the challenges faced by the world in the early post-war years
Day 6: Post war settlement and Bretton Woods institutions
● Make the students read the material available online/in library and debate the impact of
Bretton Woods institutions in the post war economy. Refer Annexure V for Rubrics.
Day 7: Decolonization and Independence - The Role of World Trade Organization:
 The students will read the handout 2 given below and present a role play of the support
rendered by the World Trade Organisation in building new nations. Refer Annexure V for
rubrics
 Introduction to the World Trade Organization
 Study the role of the WTO in promoting fair trade practices
 Discuss the efforts made towards decolonization and independence of nations
Day 8: End of Bretton Woods and the Beginning of Globalisation:
● The students will read material given in the link
https://www.imf.org/external/about/histend.htm#:~:text=End%20of%20Bretton% 20Woods
%20system,-The%20system%20 dissolved&text=In% 20August% 201971 %2C%20U.S.
%20Pr esident,the%20breakdown%20of%20the%20syste m.
● Organise an interview with a financial expert/economist/ lecturer/professor. Based on the
information they gathered, the students can submit a report on the findings.
● Discuss the reasons for the end of the Bretton Woods system
Day 9: Impact of Globalization in India and role of waterways and airways
https://www.jagranjosh.com/general-knowledge/new-economic-policy-of-1991-objectivesfeatures-and-impacts-1448348633-1
● The students will read the material given in the above link and design a report on what would
have happened to India if this stand wasn’t taken and present it as a radio talk show. They
will link the role of waterways and airways in the achievement of India in globalisation.
● Study the impact of globalisation on the Indian economy
● Discuss the challenges faced by India in the process of globalisation
Day 10. Final presentation
Conclude the interdisciplinary project and summarize the key takeaways.
15
Handout 1 for Day 4 of Inter Disciplinary Project of Class X
Title: The Role of Waterways and Airways in Post-World War II- World and India
Introduction: After the end of World War II, the world faced significant economic, social, and political
changes. The role of waterways and airways in shaping the post-war world and India is crucial to
understand. In this handout, we will discuss the impact of waterways and airways on the global
economy and how it helped India in its development.
Waterways: In the post-World War II era, waterways played a crucial role in the movement of
goods and people. The improvement of ports and waterways allowed for more efficient
transportation of goods and helped to spur economic growth.
The increased demand for goods and services, combined with the development of shipping
technologies, allowed for the expansion of international trade. This helped to boost the world
economy and allowed for the growth of industries in many countries, including India.
In India, the development of waterways and ports helped to improve the country's economy. The
country's long coastline and several rivers made it an ideal location for the transportation of goods.
The growth of ports and waterways in India allowed for the movement of goods from one part of
the country to another, helping to spur economic growth and development.
Airways: After World War II, the development of air transportation revolutionized the world's
economy. The expansion of air travel allowed for faster and more efficient transportation of goods
and people, which helped to boost the world economy.
In India, the growth of airways helped to connect different parts of the country and made it easier
for people and goods to move from one place to another. This helped to spur economic growth
and development in India.
The growth of air transportation in India also allowed for the expansion of international trade.
Indian businesses could now easily access foreign markets, which helped to boost the country's
economy.
Conclusion:
The role of waterways and airways in the post-World War II world and India was crucial in shaping
the economic and social landscape of these countries. The development of these transportation
modes helped to spur economic growth and allowed for the expansion of international trade.
Understanding the impact of waterways and airways on the world and India is crucial in
understanding the economic and social changes that took place after World War II.
Questions:
1. Mention the role of major ports in imports and exports.
2. Emergence of Deccan airways changed the entire functionalities of domestic airways.
Substantiate the statement
3. The waterways and airways contribute to the economic growth of India. Substantiate your
answer.
16
Handout 2 for day 7 of Inter Disciplinary Project of Class X
Title The Role of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in Building New Nations PostColonialization
Introduction: After the end of colonialism, many countries faced significant economic and political
challenges as they worked to establish themselves as independent nations. The World Trade
Organization (WTO) played a crucial role in helping these countries to rebuild their economies and
participate in the global economy. In this handout, we will discuss the role of the WTO in building
new nations post- colonialization.
What is the WTO?
The WTO is an international organization that was established in 1995 to promote international trade
and help countries participate in the global economy.
The WTO provides a forum for countries to negotiate and enforce international trade agreements
and helps to ensure that trade is conducted in a fair and predictable manner. The organization also
provides technical assistance and advice to help countries improve their trade policies and
participate in the global economy.
How has the WTO helped new nations post-colonialization?
After colonial rule ended, many countries faced significant economic challenges as they worked to
establish themselves as independent nations. The WTO helped these countries to participate in
the global economy by providing a forum for trade negotiations and by helping to enforce
international trade agreements.
The WTO also provided technical assistance and advice to help these countries improve their trade
policies and participate in the global economy. This helped to spur economic growth and
development in these countries and allowed them to become more integrated into the global
economy.
By participating in the global economy, new nations post-colonialisation was able to expand their
markets, attract foreign investment, and improve their economic performance. The WTO played a
crucial role in helping these countries to build their economies and establish themselves as stable,
independent nations.
Conclusion:
The WTO played a crucial role in building new nations post-colonialization by helping these
countries to participate in the global economy. The organization's trade negotiations, enforcement
of international trade agreements, and technical assistance helped to spur economic growth and
development in these countries. Understanding the role of the WTO in building new nations postcolonialization is important in understanding the economic and political changes that took place
after the end of colonial rule.
17
ANNEXURE IV
Suggested Template for Presentation by the Students
Name of the Students (Team):
Class : Section:
Topics of Interdisciplinary
Project:
Title of the Project:
Objectives:
Multiple Assessment:
Ex. Surveys / Interviews / Research work/ Observation/ Story based Presentation/ Art integration/
Quiz/ Debate/ role play/ viva, /Group discussion /visual expression/ interactive bulletin boards/
gallery walks/ exit cards/ concept maps/ peer assessment/ art integration /Self-assessment/
integration of technology etc.
Evidences: Photos, Excerpts from Interviews, observations, Videos, Research References, etc.
Overall presentation: Link of PPT, shared documents, can be digital/handwritten, as per the
convenience of the school.
Acknowledgement:
References
(websites, books, newspaper
etc.)
Reflections:
ANNEXURE V
Rubrics for Interdisciplinary Project
Rubrics Marks allocated
Research Work 1
Collaboration & Communication 1
Presentation & Content relevance 1
Competencies- Creativity, Analytical skills,
Evaluation, Synthesizing,
2
Total 5